blog/pgvector performance (#15758)
supabase/supabase: apps/www/_blog/2023-07-13-pgvector-performance.mdx

---
title: 'pgvector 0.4.0 performance'

> description: There are a few pgvector benchmarks floating around the internet, most recently a pgvector vs Qdrant comparison. We wanted to reproduce (or improve!) the results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: There's been lot of talk about pgvector performance lately, so we took some datasets and pushed pgvector to the limits to its strengths and limitations
```

Author: ```suggestion
description: There's been lot of talk about pgvector performance lately, so we took some datasets and pushed pgvector to the limits to find out its strengths and limitations```

tags:
  - AI
  - performance
  - postgres
date: '2023-07-13'
toc_depth: 2
author: egor_romanov,pavel
image: 2023-07-13-pgvector-performance/chatgpt-plugins-support-postgres.jpeg
thumb: 2023-07-13-pgvector-performance/chatgpt-plugins-support-postgres.jpeg
---

There are a few pgvector benchmarks floating around the internet, most recently a [pgvector vs Qdrant](https://nirantk.com/writing/pgvector-vs-qdrant/) comparison by NirantK. We wanted to reproduce (or improve!) the results.

> There is an obvious bias here: we're a Postgres company. It is NOT our goal to prove that pgvector is better than Qdrant for running vector workloads - it's not. Qdrant is a specialized Vector engine, and specialized systems always outperform generalized systems. From everything we hear about Qdrant, it's fantastic (even compared to other specialized Vector databases).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There is an obvious bias here: we're a Postgres company. It is NOT our goal to prove that pgvector is better than Qdrant for running vector workloads - it's not. Qdrant is a specialized Vector engine, and specialized systems outperform generalized systems. From everything we hear about Qdrant, it's fantastic (even compared to other specialized Vector databases).
```

With a 64-core, 256 GB server we achieve ~1800 RPS and 0.91 precision. This is for pgvector 0.4.0, and we've heard that the latest version (0.4.4) already has significant improvements. We'll release those benchmarks as soon as we have them.

<div>
  <img
    alt="multi database"
    className="dark:hidden"
    src="/images/blog/2023-07-13-pgvector-performance/size-to-rps--light.png"
  />
  <img
    alt="multi database"
    className="hidden dark:block"
    src="/images/blog/2023-07-13-pgvector-performance/size-to-rps--dark.png"
  />
</div>

## Other performance factors

It's been about 5 months since we [added](https://supabase.com/blog/openai-embeddings-postgres-vector) pgvector to the platform. Since then we've discovered a few other important things to keep in mind.

### Increasing lists improves performance

Another way to improve performance without throwing more compute would be to increase `lists`.

We ran a test to measure the impact of list size: we uploaded 90,000 vectors from Wikipedia dataset and then queried 10,000 vectors from the same dataset. The documentation recommends to use `lists` constant of `number of vectors / 1000`. In this case, it would be 90.

> But as our experiment shows, we can improve select queries speed if we make more lists (i.e. with more lists in the index we need to get less index data to get the same precision). E.g. for a precision of 95%, we need to take
> 
> - 3% of index data for 270 lists,
> - 6% - for 90 lists,
> - and 13% - for 30 lists.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But as our experiment shows, we can improve `select` speed if we increase lists (i.e. with more lists in the index we need to get less index data to get the same precision). So for 95% precision, we can take any of:

- 3% of index data = 270 lists
- 6% of index data = 90 lists
- 13% of index data = 30 lists
```

2. Prefer `inner-product` to `L2` or `Cosine` distances if your vectors are normalized (like `text-embedding-ada-002`). If embeddings are not normalized, `Cosine` distance should give the best results with an index.
3. **Pre-warm your database.** Implement the warm-up technique we described earlier before transitioning to production.
4. **Establish your workload.** Increasing the lists constant for the pgvector index can accelerate your queries (at the expense of a slower build). For instance, for benchmarks with OpenAI embeddings, we employed a `lists` constant of 2000 (`number of vectors / 500`) as opposed to the suggested 1000 (`number of vectors / 1000`).
5. **Benchmark your own specific workloads.** Doing this during cache warm-up helps gauge the best value for the `probes` constant, balancing precision with RPS.

### Going into production

Before running your pgvector workload in production, here are a few steps you can take to maximize performance.

1. Over-provision RAM during preparation. You can scale down in step `5`, but it's better to start with a larger size to get the best results for RAM requirements. (We'd recommend at least 8XL if you're using Supabase.)

> 2. Upload your data to the database. If you use `[vecs](https://supabase.com/docs/guides/ai/python/api)` library, it will automatically generate an index with default parameters.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Upload your data to the database. If you use [`vecs`](https://supabase.com/docs/guides/ai/python/api) library, it will automatically generate an index with default parameters.
```

5. Scale down your compute add-on to the one that would have the same amount of RAM as used at the moment.
6. Repeat step 3. to load the data into RAM. You should see that RPS is increased on subsequent runs, and stop when it no longer increases. Then repeat the benchmark with probes set to a higher value as well if you didn't do it before on that compute add-on size.
7. Run a benchmark using real queries and see the results. You can use `vecs` library for that as well with `ann-benchmarks` tool. Do it with probes set to 10 (default) and then gradually increase/decrease probes value until you see that both precision and RPS match your requirements.
8. If you want higher RPS and you don't expect to have frequent inserts and reindexing, you can increase `lists` constantly. You have to rebuild the index with higher lists value and repeat steps 6-7 to find the best combination of `lists` and `probes` constants to achieve the best RPS and precision values. Higher `lists` mean that index will build slower, but you can achieve better RPS and precision. Higher probes mean that select queries will be slower, but you can achieve better precision.

## The pgvector roadmap

> pgvector is still early in development. As with any open source tool, it needs time and resources to make it better. Supabase plans to continue Andrew with his development of pgvector as much as we can.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
pgvector is still early in development. As with any open source tool, it needs time and resources to make it better. Supabase plans to continue Andrew with his development of pgvector.
```

    src="/images/blog/2023-07-13-pgvector-performance/nirantk--light.png"
  />
  <img
    alt="multi database"
    className="hidden dark:block"
    src="/images/blog/2023-07-13-pgvector-performance/nirantk--dark.png"
  />
</div>

They aren't very flattering! Repeating our statements above, these benchmarks are using the defaults for both engines. Our goal now is to replicate the results, and then see what improvements need to be made as developers scale up their workload.

## Results

Our tests mirrored NirantK's: but incorporated slight variations:

Same:

- We used the same dataset
- We used the same hardware: a 2XL instance on Supabase, which offers the same core and RAM count as NirantK's machine - 8 cores and 32 GB of RAM

Changed:

- We used the pre-warming technique described earlier.
- We used the `inner-product` distance function.
- We set `lists` constant for an index equal to 2000 instead of 1000.
- We adjusted the [Probes](https://github.com/pgvector/pgvector#query-options) in various runs to benchmark the difference (NirantK's tests used `probes = 1`).

The resulting figures were significantly different after these changes.

### PROBES = 10

> With probes set to 10, pgvector was faster and more accurate:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the changes above and probes set to 10, pgvector was faster and more accurate:
```

- precision@10 of 0.91
- RPS (requests per second) of 380

<div>
  <img
    alt="multi database"
    className="dark:hidden"
    src="/images/blog/2023-07-13-pgvector-performance/pgvector-optimized--light.png"
  />
  <img
    alt="multi database"
    className="hidden dark:block"
    src="/images/blog/2023-07-13-pgvector-performance/pgvector-optimized--dark.png"
  />
</div>

### PROBES = 40

> With probes set to 40, pgvector was not just substantially faster but also boasted almost the same precision as Qdrant:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If we increase the probes from 10 to 40, pgvector was not just substantially faster but also boasted almost the same precision as Qdrant:
```

- precision@10 of 0.98
- RPS of 140

<div>
  <img
    alt="multi database"
    className="dark:hidden"
    src="/images/blog/2023-07-13-pgvector-performance/pgvector-qdrant--light.png"
  />
  <img
    alt="multi database"
    className="hidden dark:block"
    src="/images/blog/2023-07-13-pgvector-performance/pgvector-qdrant--dark.png"
  />
</div>

### Scaling the database

Another key takeaway is that the performance scales predictably with the size of the database. For instance, a 4XL instance achieves precision@10 of 0.98 and RPS of 270 with probes set to 40. Moreover, an 8XL compute add-on analogously obtains precision@10 of 0.98 and an RPS of 470, surpassing the results of Qdrant.

<div className="bg-gray-300 rounded-lg px-6 py-2 italic">

> Again, it is NOT our goal to prove that pgvector is better than Qdrant for running vector workloads. The Qdrant benchmark uses “default” configuration and is in not indicative of its capabilities after modifying the configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Qdrant benchmark uses “default” configuration and is in not indicative of its capabilities after modifying the configuration.
```

</div>

<div>
  <img
    alt="multi database"
    className="dark:hidden"
    src="/images/blog/2023-07-13-pgvector-performance/pgvector-8xl--light.png"
  />
  <img
    alt="multi database"
    className="hidden dark:block"
    src="/images/blog/2023-07-13-pgvector-performance/pgvector-8xl--dark.png"
  />
</div>

> Although more compute is required to match Qdrant's precision and RPS levels concurrently, this is still a satisfying outcome. It means that it's not a _necessity_ to use another vector database - if you want to lower your operational complexity, just increase your Postgres size.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Although more compute is required to match Qdrant's precision and RPS levels concurrently, this is still a satisfying outcome. It means that it's not a _necessity_ to use another vector database. You can put everything in Postgres to lower your operational complexity.
```

With a 64-core, 256 GB server we achieve ~1800 RPS and 0.91 precision. This is for pgvector 0.4.0, and we've heard that the latest version (0.4.4) already has significant improvements. We'll release those benchmarks as soon as we have them.

<div>
  <img
    alt="multi database"
    className="dark:hidden"
    src="/images/blog/2023-07-13-pgvector-performance/size-to-rps--light.png"
  />
  <img
    alt="multi database"
    className="hidden dark:block"
    src="/images/blog/2023-07-13-pgvector-performance/size-to-rps--dark.png"
  />
</div>

## Other performance factors

It's been about 5 months since we [added](https://supabase.com/blog/openai-embeddings-postgres-vector) pgvector to the platform. Since then we've discovered a few other important things to keep in mind.

### Increasing lists improves performance

Another way to improve performance without throwing more compute would be to increase `lists`.

We ran a test to measure the impact of list size: we uploaded 90,000 vectors from the Wikipedia dataset and then queried 10,000 vectors from the same dataset. The documentation recommends to use `lists` constant of `number of vectors / 1000`. In this case, it would be 90.

> But as our experiment shows, we can improve `select` speed if we increase lists (i.e. with more lists in the index we need to get less index data to get the same precision). So for 95% precision, we can take any of:

Author: ```suggestion
But as our experiment shows, we can improve RPS if we increase `lists` (i.e. with more lists in the index we need to get less index data to get the same precision). So for 95% precision, we can take any of:
```

5. Scale down your compute add-on to the one that would have the same amount of RAM as used at the moment.
6. Repeat step 3. to load the data into RAM. You should see that RPS is increased on subsequent runs, and stop when it no longer increases. Then repeat the benchmark with probes set to a higher value as well if you didn't do it before on that compute add-on size.
7. Run a benchmark using real queries and see the results. You can use `vecs` library for that as well with `ann-benchmarks` tool. Do it with probes set to 10 (default) and then gradually increase/decrease probes value until you see that both precision and RPS match your requirements.
8. If you want higher RPS and you don't expect to have frequent inserts and reindexing, you can increase `lists` constantly. You have to rebuild the index with higher lists value and repeat steps 6-7 to find the best combination of `lists` and `probes` constants to achieve the best RPS and precision values. Higher `lists` mean that index will build slower, but you can achieve better RPS and precision. Higher probes mean that select queries will be slower, but you can achieve better precision.

## The pgvector roadmap

> pgvector is still early in development. As with any open source tool, it needs time and resources to make it better. Supabase plans to continue Andrew with his development of pgvector.

Author: ```suggestion
pgvector is still early in development. As with any open source tool, it needs time and resources to make it better. Supabase plans to continue support Andrew with his development of pgvector.
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pgvector is still early in development. As with any open source tool, it needs time and resources to make it better. Supabase plans to continue supporting Andrew with his development of pgvector.
```
